1
Millimetre-wave Radar for Low-Cost 3D Imaging:
A Performance Study
Han Cui, Jiacheng Wu and Naim Dahnoun
Abstract—Millimetre-wave (mmWave) radars can generate 3D
point clouds to represent objects in the scene. However, the accu-
racy and density of the generated point cloud can be lower than
a laser sensor. Although researchers have used mmWave radars
for various applications, there are few quantitative evaluations
on the quality of the point cloud generated by the radar and
there is a lack of a standard on how this quality can be assessed.
This work aims to ﬁll the gap in the literature. A radar simulator
is built to evaluate the most common data processing chains of
3D point cloud construction and to examine the capability of the
mmWave radar as a 3D imaging sensor under various factors. It
will be shown that the radar detection can be noisy and have an
imbalance distribution. To address the problem, a novel super-
resolution point cloud construction (SRPC) algorithm is proposed
to improve the spatial resolution of the point cloud and is shown
to be able to produce a more natural point cloud and reduce
outliers.
Index Terms—mmWave radar, 3D imaging, point cloud
I. I NTRODUCTION
Millimetre-wave (mmWave) radars have received increased
popularity in many industries as an emerging type of sensor.
The high bandwidth allows them to estimate the distance of an
object at centimetre-level resolution, and the short wavelength
and antenna size allow multiple antennas to be integrated into
a single chip and measure the angle-of-arrival (AoA) of the ob-
ject using multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) techniques
[1]. Combining the distance and AoA measurement, mmWave
radars are able to construct a point cloud to represent the
spatial shape of an object [2]. Therefore, mmWave radars can
be used as a low-cost 3D imaging sensor, as an alternative to
the traditional depth cameras and laser sensors. This allows
many computer vision tasks, such as object detection [3],
human tracking [4], [5], posture estimation [6], [7], and
identiﬁcation [4], to be addressed using mmWave radars as a
non-intrusive solution. However, although many applications
have been proposed that rely on the 3D imaging capability of
mmWave radars, few researchers have attempted to evaluate
the quality of mmWave radars’ detection quantitatively, and
there is a lack of a standard on how this quality can be
assessed.
When detecting objects in a scene, the reﬂection signal can
be seen as a time-delayed version of the transmitted signal.
Combining the two signals gives an intermediate frequency
(IF) signal, whose frequency and phase are determined by
the time-of-ﬂight (ToF) of the signal, and, equivalently, the
distance between the object and the radar [2]. The distance
can be estimated directly from the IF signal of one pair of
transmitter and receiver at high resolution, whereas the AoA
needs to be estimated from the signal phase over a linearly
spaced antenna array. There is rich literature on antenna
array-based AoA estimation for traditional radars [8], and the
same concept also applies to mmWave radars. This paper
discusses the AoA estimation in the context of mmWave
radar 3D imaging. It reviews and discusses the 3D point
cloud construction techniques that are commonly used with
mmWave radars.
This paper presents a purpose-built simulation system that
simulates the data acquisition process of a mmWave radar
when facing a scene. Radar data simulation allows researchers
to focus on algorithm design and veriﬁcation, instead of
investing too much time in the hardware and real-world data
collection. Existing radar simulators are often not designed
for 3D imaging and have certain constraints. For example, the
system in [9] generates range and Doppler information of the
radar rather than the raw data, the system in [10] only supports
single antenna data generation and cannot be used to estimate
the AoA, and the system in [11] only supports up to four
receivers in one direction and cannot be used for 3D imaging.
In this research, a lightweight mmWave radar simulator is
designed that supports raw data generation of a multi-antenna
mmWave radar, conﬁgurable antenna parameters and layout,
and customized scene construction using 3D human models
with programmable motions.
Using the simulation system, a quantitative evaluation of
the radar’s capability of imaging a human subject is carried
out, as well as an evaluation of the key factors that could
affect the output quality, including the data processing chain
(DPC), radar antenna conﬁguration, chirp conﬁguration, sub-
ject velocity, and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the scene.
It will be shown that, although the radar can capture the
spatial information of the subject’s body shape, the detected
point cloud can be noisy, sparse and imbalanced, and can
require further processing before being used for higher-level
applications. Finally, a novel super-resolution point cloud
construction (SRPC) algorithm is proposed to improve the
spatial resolution of the point cloud and is shown to be able
to produce a more natural point cloud and reduce outliers.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized as fol-
lows:
• It presents a simulator of mmWave radar that can simulate
the radar data as if it is placed in a real scene. It supports
customized 3D models to be imported as the ground truth
and provides a framework for evaluating a 3D imaging
algorithm quantitatively.
• It presents a systematical study of 3D imaging algorithms
using mmWave radars and an evaluation of the key factors
arXiv:2301.13553v1  [eess.SP]  31 Jan 2023

2
that could affect the radar detection. It highlights the
challenges of the noisy and imbalanced point cloud.
• It presents a novel SRPC algorithm that can be inserted
into the traditional point cloud construction DPC and can
improve the quality of the point cloud.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
discusses the background and related work. Section III in-
troduces the preliminaries of mmWave radars. Section IV
presents the details of the simulator. Section V discusses the
3D imaging DPC using mmWave radars. Section VI presents
the experimental results based on the simulation system.
Section VII presents the novel SRPC algorithm and shows how
it can improve the radar detection. Section VIII concludes the
work.
II. B ACKGROUND
Traditionally, 3D imaging systems often use depth cameras
(like stereo cameras or RGBD cameras) [12] or laser sensors
[13], which are able to provide a dense and accurate 3D
model of the object in front. However, camera-based systems
can be intrusive and limited by the lighting conditions, and
laser sensors are often constrained by their high cost (when
compared with the cost of a mmWave radar which is only
around £10). Radar-based 2D imaging has also been used
widely in applications like security, but they provide limited
depth information and often rely on a dense antenna array
that has a ﬁxed region-of-interest [14]. Radar-based 3D object
detection uses radio frequency (RF) signals at certain fre-
quencies to detect objects, and the resolution of the detection
largely depends on the available bandwidth. For example,
WiFi devices operating at 5 GHz with a 40 MHz bandwidth
can locate people with sub-meter level resolution [15], and
ultra-wide band (UWB) devices at higher frequency bands
can achieve centimetre level resolution [16]. With mmWave
radars operating at above 60 GHz, the range resolution can
be below 5 cm [2] and even micrometre level when pointing
to a corner reﬂector [17]. Therefore, the high resolution has
gained mmWave radars great popularity in automotive driving
applications, and researchers are actively investigating their
usage in computer vision tasks.
Although mmWave radars can be used as 3D imaging
sensors, the point cloud is often less accurate and noisier than
the traditional systems [5]. Many methods have been proposed
to improve the detection quality of a mmWave radar, such as
[18], [19]. However, as these methods often use different radar
conﬁgurations and scene setup, it is hard to carry out a quan-
titative comparison between them, and there lacks a standard
on how to deﬁne the quality of the radar detection. This work
aims to address the problem by providing a simulation system
and a framework for a systematic evaluation of a 3D imaging
algorithm.
Radar-based 3D imaging requires measuring the distance
and AoA of the object. The distance is often measured through
the ToF of the signal, whereas the AoA measurement relies
on the use of an antenna array. Since the antennas in the array
will have different physical locations, the ToF at each antenna
will be different, and the AoA of the object can be estimated
by investigating the signal difference. This process has been
studied in depth for traditional long-range radars [8], and the
same principle can be applied to mmWave radars on a smaller
scale. There are many algorithms designed for estimating the
AoA based on a linearly spaced antenna array, such as the FFT-
based method, beamforming method and subspace method
(more details in Section III-C). These algorithms provide
a trade-off between the computational complexity and the
angular resolution [8], [20]. However, in contrast to traditional
radar systems where the signal sources are often well-deﬁned
and uncorrelated, signal sources in 3D imaging can be one
object with a continuous surface, which can require a different
DPC. This paper discusses the traditional AoA estimation
algorithms in the context of 3D imaging using a mmWave
radar and investigates the key factors that would affect the
detection result.
III. MMWAVE RADAR PRELIMINARIES
Commercial mmWave radars often implement the frequency
modulated continuous wave (FMCW) model. The radar sends
a modulated chirp signal, detects the signal reﬂection from
any object, processes the signal and determines the range,
velocity, and AoA of the object. The principle of the FMCW
radar model has been documented in detail in the literature
(e.g. [5]). This section will give a brief discussion of the
fundamentals that are necessary for understanding this paper,
with a particular focus on the AoA estimation.
The radar sends an FMCW signal and receives its reﬂection
from the object in the scene, where the reﬂection will be a
time-delayed version of the transmitted signal. The two signals
are mixed to produce an IF signal, as shown in Equation (1)
(more details in Appendix A):
IF (t) =Aej(ωbt+φb) where ωb = 2πSτ, φb = 2πf0τ (1)
where S is the slope of the chirp, τ is the ToF of the signal,
f0 is the starting frequency of the chirp, and A represents the
amplitude of the signal. After obtaining the IF signal, a DPC
will be applied to determine the presence of any object.
A. Distance and Velocity Estimation
For a single object, the frequency ωb will be a constant
value and the distance of the object can be calculated as
d = τc
2 = ωbc
4πS (2)
When there are multiple refection sources, the frequencies can
be found by applying an FFT over the IF signal, which is
referred to as the range-FFT. The velocity can be measured by
transmitting multiple chirps at a known interval and calculating
the phase difference between the chirps. Assuming the radar
transmits a chirp every Tc seconds and a phase difference ∆φ
is observed between successive chirps, then the velocity v of
the object can be estimated as:
v = ∆φc
4πTcf0
(3)
When there are multiple reﬂection sources moving at different
velocities, they can be found by applying another FFT over
the chirp phases, which is referred to as the Doppler-FFT.

3
Fig. 1: Phase difference between two receivers from one signal
source.
B. AoA Estimation Principle
The AoA of the object can be estimated by having multiple
antennas operating concurrently and by comparing the phase
difference between neighbouring receivers. Due to the spatial
location difference between the receivers, the signal received at
each receiver will have a slight phase difference depending on
the relative position of the receivers and the AoA. The AoA
can be computed in both azimuth and elevation directions,
given that there exists more than one antenna in each direction.
The azimuth and elevation angles will be denoted as θa and
θe, respectively, or θ(a,e) when referring to both of them.
Assuming there areNa×Ne linearly spaced receivers in the
azimuth and elevation directions, and M objects in different
directionsθ(a,e)m, then each object can be viewed as a signal
source and the receiving antenna array will receive a signal
(denoted as x) as a weighted sum of the M data source:
x(Na×Ne) =
M∑
m=1
αms(θ(a,e)m) +n (4)
where s(θ(a,e)m) is the steering vector that represents the
phase difference between receivers when a signal arrives with
angle θ(a,e)m, α is an unknown parameter that models the
signal transmission from the data source to the receivers,
and n is the noise. The AoA estimation can be modelled as
estimating the values of θ(a,e) for each object m, given a set
of receiver data (x).
For linearly spaced arrays, the receivers are often separated
by a small distance l that is equal to half of the signal wave-
length, i.e. l = λ
2 , to maximize the angle-of-view (AoV) [8].
When using an array ofNa azimuth receivers andNe elevation
receivers, each subsequent receiver beyond the ﬁrst one will
receive an additional phase change that can be expressed using
a 2D steering vector (more details in Appendix B):
s(θ(a,e),Na,Ne) =

1, ..., e j(Na−1)∆φa
ej∆φe, ..., e j(∆φe+(Na−1)∆φa)
..., ..., ...
ej(Ne−1)∆φe, ..., e j((Ne−1)∆φe+(Na−1)∆φa)


(5)
3D point cloud construction requires the x-y-z coordinates
of the object instead of the azimuth and elevation angles.
Therefore, the calculation of the exact value of θa and θe is
often not required. Letd denote the distance of the object, then
the 3D coordinates of the object can be calculated as (more
details in Appendix B):
x =d∆φa
π , z =d∆φe
π , y =
√
d2−x2−z2 (6)
Given thatd can be obtained from the range-FFT as discussed
in Section III-A, the x-y-z coordinates can be obtained if the
phase differences ∆φa and ∆φe are known. Therefore, the
AoA estimation of an object can be considered equivalently
as searching for the best matching steering vector s(θ(a,e)m)
of the object.
C. AoA Estimation Algorithms
In the following sections, some of the most widely-used
AoA estimation algorithms will be discussed, including the
FFT-based method, conventional beamforming (also known as
the Bartlett beamforming or the delay-and-sum beamforming),
the minimum variance distortionless response (MVDR) beam-
forming (also known as the Capon beamforming) [21], and
the multiple signal classiﬁcation (MUSIC) subspace method
[22]. The angle-FFT method is a single-snapshot method
that can make an estimate based on a single chirp, whereas
the other methods are multi-snapshot methods that require a
few chirps to make one estimate. The performance of the
algorithms depends on several factors, including the antenna
layout, number of antennas, chirp conﬁguration, number of
snapshots, SNR, environment, etc.
1) Angle-FFT Method: The simplest way of estimating
s(θ(a,e)m) of an object m in Equation (4) is by using cor-
relation between the receiver data x and the steering vector
from the candidate angles. A set of candidate steering vectors
s(¯θ(a,e)) is deﬁned for θa ∈ [−π,π ],θe∈ [−π,π ], and the
correlation is calculated as s(¯θ(a,e))·x, which will yield a
peak output when ¯θ(a,e) equals to θ(a,e)m. This process is
equivalent to applying an FFT over the receiver data x, since
the steering vector can be considered the same as a set of FFT
coefﬁcients, which gives the frequency components in terms of
∆φa and ∆φe. This FFT is also referred to as the angle-FFT.
As an example, Figure 2 shows the antenna layout of the
TI IWR6843 radar. It has three transmitters and four receivers,
which can form a 12-receiver array when using MIMO tech-
niques [1]. The phase of each virtual receiver is also shown,
where ϕ is the random initial phase of the ﬁrst receiver.
The azimuth receivers will form a signal ej(∆φan+ϕ) and the
elevation receivers will form a signal ej(∆φan+2∆φa+ϕ+∆φe),
where n is the receiver index in each direction. The value
of ∆φa can be obtained by applying an azimuth-FFT over
the azimuth receivers (RX1-RX4 and RX9-RX12), which will
give the frequency ∆φa and phase ϕ. The value of ∆φa can
be obtained by applying an FFT over the elevation receivers,
which will give the frequency∆φa and phase 2∆φa+ϕ+∆φe.
Hence, the value of ∆φe can also be calculated given ∆φa
and ϕ.
An alternative approach to calculate ∆φa is by applying an
elevation-FFT over a set of receivers in the elevation direction.
For example, Figure 3 shows the layout of the TI overhead
detection sensor (ODS) model, where the receivers form a
near-square shape and allows a 2D angle-FFT to be performed.

4
Fig. 2: IWR6843 radar antenna layout, the virtual receiver
array and the received phases.
The ODS models allow a higher elevation resolution at the cost
of reduced azimuth resolution.
Fig. 3: IWR6843ODS radar antenna layout, the virtual receiver
array and the received phases.
2) Beamforming Method: Beamforming methods calculate
a set of weights w(Nrx×Θ) for the Nrx virtual receivers in the
array (both azimuth and elevation), and for all possible angles
θ(a,e)∈ Θ where θa∈ [−π,π ],θe∈ [−π,π ]. When applying
a column of weights to the receiver data x, the signal from the
directionθ will receive a constructive inference. By searching
all possible angles θ(a,e), a power spectrum p with size Θ can
be obtained, where a high power in the spectrum indicates that
there is a data source in that direction:
p =wHx (7)
where wH is the Hermitian transposition of w. The angles of
theM objects can be obtained by taking the M highest peaks
in p and ﬁnding the corresponding entries in w.
In the data model shown in Equation (4), signals reﬂected
from objects will be correlated when being received at each
receiver, whereas the noise will be uncorrelated. Therefore,
one way to extract signal information from x is by calculating
a sensor covariance matrix Rx [8]:
Rx =E{xHx}≈ 1
N
N∑
t=1
xH(t)x(t) (8)
where E represents the statistical expectation and x(t) repre-
sents one snapshot (or one frame) of the receiver datax. When
evaluating the beamforming power spectrum using multiple
snapshots, the overall power spectrum becomes the statistical
expectation of p in Equation (7) over the snapshots, which
gives:
P =E{|wHx|2} = 1
N
N∑
t=1
wHx(t)xH(t)w =wHRxw (9)
Once the beamforming power spectrum is computed, the peaks
in the spectrum will correspond to the signal from the objects.
There are many algorithms designed for calculating the
weights w. The conventional beamforming uses the steering
vector directly as the weights, which is conceptually equivalent
to the angle-FFT method (or correlation-based method) in
Section III-C1:
Pconventional =sHRxs (10)
where s is the candidate steering vector in the format of
Equation (5).
There are also adaptive beamforming algorithms that calcu-
late the weights using the signal information embedded in the
covariance matrix. For example, the MVDR algorithm aims at
minimizing the variance from non-interested directions while
keeping the signal from the candidate direction distortionless
[21]:
Pmvdr = 1
sHR−1x s (11)
3) Subspace Method: The core of the subspace method is
that, since the signal x should contain M correlated signals
and uncorrelated noise, the covariance matrix Rx should have
M non-zero eigenvalues and N−M zero eigenvalues, where
N is the rank of Rx that is equal to the number of receivers.
The eigenvectors corresponding to theM eigenvalues form the
signal subspace, and the eigenvectors corresponding to the zero
eigenvalues form the noise subspace. The signal subspace and
the noise subspace are orthogonal. One of the most widely-
used subspace-based algorithms is the MUSIC algorithm [22].
It searches for steering vectors that are orthogonal to the noise
subspace. The power spectrum of the MUSIC algorithm can
be written as:
Pmusic = 1
sHUUHs (12)
where U is the set of eigenvectors corresponding to the zero
eigenvalues.
IV. MMWAVE RADAR SIMULATOR
A simulator is designed to verify the discussed algorithms
and evaluate the theoretical capability of using a mmWave
radar as a 3D sensor. The simulator simulates mmWave radars
with one transmitter and one receiving antenna array, which
is practically equivalent to a multi-transmitter multi-receiver
radar using an appropriate modulation scheme [1]. Any two
neighbouring receivers in the array are separated by λ0/2,
where λ0 (approximately 3.9 mm) is the wavelength of the
mmWave signal at its chirp starting frequency ( 77 GHz).
The simulator simulates the IF signal at each receiver of a
mmWave radar when pointing toward a scene. The scene is
modelled to have M points, where each point has a unique x-
y-z coordinate and represents the spatial location of the object
in the scene. Each point is modelled as a corner reﬂector and
reﬂects the mmWave signal sent out by the radar with the
same reﬂectivity. The reﬂection area of the object is modelled
by the number of points, i.e. a large object would have a
higher number of points. The IF signal at a receiver during
one chirp is modelled using Equation (1). Given a certain chirp

5
conﬁguration, the frequency and phase of the IF signal from
one point are determined by the distance d between the point
and the receiver. The amplitude of the IF signal is set to be
inversely proportional to d4, to simulate the power loss due
to distances according to the radar range equation [23]. The
ﬁnal IF signal at a receiver is the accumulated IF signals from
all M points in the scene, with an additional white Gaussian
noise n, as shown in Equation (13).
IF (t) =
M∑
i=1
1
d4
i
ej(2πSτ i·t+2πf0τi) +n (13)
where τi is the ToF of the signal from the transmitter to
the point i and then to the receiver, and S is the slope of
the chirp. The amplitude of the noise n is controlled by
the desired SNR during the experiment. The signal IF (t)
is sampled into a digital signal of length Ns, where Ns =
(duration of the chirp) × (ADC sampling rate). During one
chirp, the radar receives a signal that can be represented as
a 2D matrix of size Nrx×Ns, where Nrx is the number of
receivers in the array. One frame includes Nc chirps that form
a 3D matrix of size Nrx×Nc×Ns, which becomes the input
matrix of the point cloud construction algorithm, as shown as
the input block in Figure 4.
The design of the simulation system makes two assump-
tions. First, the multipath effect is not considered in this
system. While the multipath effect is a long-standing issue that
can cause power fading and ghost targets, it highly depends
on the scene and the reﬂectivity of the objects and is hard to
incorporate in the model, so it is left as future work. Second,
a practical radar often uses multiple transmitters and receivers
and an appropriate signal modulation scheme to separate the
signal from different transmitters, such as time demultiplexing
modulation and binary phase modulation [1], to achieve an
equivalent single-transmitter-multi-receiver system. The simu-
lation system assumes a perfect signal modulation scheme for
this purpose and ignores any error or SNR loss that may be
introduced during the modulation process.
V. P OINT CLOUD CONSTRUCTION ALGORITHM
The construction of a point cloud takes an input matrix of
size Nrx×Nc×Ns and outputs a 2D matrix PCK of size
K× 3 (referred to as the output point cloud), where K is
the number of detected points and 3 is the x-y-z coordinates.
This section studies one of the most common DPCs used on
mmWave radars and its variant, which have shown success in
many HAR systems, like in [4], [6], [24].
A. Data Processing Chains
Two DPCs are implemented that differ in using a Doppler-
FFT or not, as shown in Figure 4. Both DPCs require a
range-FFT over the raw data. The range-FFT identiﬁes the
frequency components in the IF signal that correspond to the
distance of an object. It transforms the input matrix X of size
Nrx×Nc×Ns into a range matrix R of size Nrx×Nc×N ∗
s ,
whereN ∗
s is the length of the range-FFT. The ﬁrst DPC applies
a Doppler-FFT on the data from all the chirps and generates
Fig. 4: Two possible DPCs for mmWave radar point cloud
construction.
a Range-Doppler heatmap of size Nrx×N ∗
c ×N ∗
s , where
N ∗
c is the length of the Doppler-FFT. Then, it searches for
peaks in the Range-Doppler heatmap (using the average of
all receivers), extracts the receivers’ data for each peak and
generates a 2D matrix of size K× Nrx, where K is the
number of detected peaks and, equivalently, the number of
detected points. A constant false alarm rate (CFAR) algorithm
is used for detecting peaks from the Range-Doppler heatmap.
The parameters of the CFAR control the sensitivity of the
peak detection and are considered the hyperparameters of the
system. Finally, a single-snapshot AoA estimation is applied
to each point in the matrix for a total of K times, to obtain the
x-y-z coordinates of all detected points. The AoA estimation
algorithm can be any of the angle-FFT, beamforming or
subspace methods. Although the beamforming and subspace
methods are multi-snapshot algorithms, the Doppler-FFT im-
plicitly uses the information from all chirps and allows a good
estimate of the covariance matrix at the AoA estimation stage.
The second DPC does not include a Doppler-FFT. Instead, it
considers the chirps as different snapshots and performs one
multi-snapshot estimation for each range bin for a total of
N ∗
s times. More speciﬁcally, the input range matrix of size
Nrx×Nc×N ∗
s is re-arranged into N ∗
s instances of Nrx×Nc
matrix, and the AoA estimation is applied to each Nrx×Nc
matrix using Nc snapshots. The AoA estimation algorithm
can be any of the beamforming or subspace methods. Finally,
the points detected at each range bin are concatenated into
one point cloud. In this research, the angle-FFT, conventional
beamforming, MVDR beamforming and MUSIC subspace
methods described in Section III-C are being studied.
B. Model Order Estimation
As described in Section III-C2 and Section III-C3, the
beamforming and subspace methods include an angle power
spectrum computation step, where each peak in the spectrum
corresponds to an incoming signal from a point. However,
in both DPCs, the expected number of incoming signals will
be unknown in practice. Therefore, this number needs to
be estimated from the signal data. This step is referred to
as model order estimation. For this purpose, the covariance
matrix of the signal data and its eigenvalues are computed. As

6
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 5: Three approaches when searching for the steering
vectors. (a) An azimuth search (red) followed by an elevation
search (black). (b) A full 2D azimuth-elevation search. (c) A
2D azimuth-elevation search using sub-grids.
described in Section III-C3, the covariance matrix should have
a size of Nrx×Nrx and has a full rank equal to Nrx. There
should be M large eigenvalues that correspond to the number
of incoming signals and Nrx− M zeros corresponding to
noise. In practice, due to the presence of noise, the difference
between these eigenvalues may not be signiﬁcant. Therefore,
the minimum descriptive length (MDL) algorithm [25] is used
for estimating the value of M. It ﬁts a statistical model using
the eigenvalues and searches for the optimal value of M that
minimizes a cost function. The MDL algorithm is used in both
DPCs to estimate the number of incoming signals in the AoA
estimation stage. Once the angle power spectrum is calculated,
all the local maxima will be found and the largest Mmdl peaks
will be taken as the output, where Mmdl is the value found
from the MDL algorithm.
C. Steering Vector Searching
The beamforming and subspace methods search for the
steering vectors that maximize a power function. This process
can be carried out using three approaches: an azimuth search
followed by an elevation search, a 2D azimuth-elevation search
or a 2D search using sub-grids. An example of the three
approaches is shown in Figure 5. In the example, the power
spectrum shows the incoming direction of the signal. The
space of the spectrum is sampled into a 17×17 grid and each
vertex on the grid represents a candidate AoA to be tested.
In the ﬁrst approach, an azimuth AoA search is performed
using the data from azimuth receivers and steering vectors that
only consider the azimuth angle. Then, based on the azimuth
AoA output, a secondary search is performed in the elevation
direction using the data from all receivers. This approach has
the least computational cost (34 searches in the example), but
the performance can be suboptimal as the azimuth search may
not cover the actual AoA. The second approach performs a 2D
search that considers all possible combinations of the azimuth
and elevation directions and uses data from all receivers. It
is computationally expensive (289 searches in the example)
but provides the most accurate estimate. The third approach
deﬁnes several levels of grids and performs the AoA search
at different granularities. It starts the searching with a sparse
grid, ﬁnds the peaks, deﬁnes a denser grid around each peak
and performs the next search. The process can be performed
iteratively until the desired resolution is achieved. It reduces
Fig. 6: Some examples of the mesh models and point clouds
from the FAUST dataset.
the computational cost of the second approach signiﬁcantly as
it skips certain regions in the spectrum (50 searches in the
example), at the cost of the potential possibility of missing
some peaks.
VI. E VALUATION
A. Dataset
The FAUST dataset [26] was used to serve as the ground
truth for the simulator, to evaluate the point cloud construction
algorithms described. The datasets contain human models in
the form of watertight triangulated meshes. The meshes were
generated from a high-resolution camera system containing
stereo cameras, RGB cameras and speckle projectors. The
FAUST dataset contains 10 subjects and 30 static postures
per subject, of which 10 postures are provided with aligned
watertight models, giving 100 models in total.
In the simulation, the models were placed at 2 m from the
radar and facing towards the radar. The height of the radar
was set to be in the middle of each model. A ground truth
point cloud was constructed from each model by randomly
sampling M points from the surface of the mesh model,
where each point was assumed to be a corner reﬂector. Some
examples of the mesh models and point clouds are shown in
Figure 6. The simulator computed a signal matrix for each
point cloud to simulate the IF signal that would be received
by the radar when placed towards a subject, as described by
Equation (13). The entire dataset containing the 100 models
was split into 80 training data and 20 test data, where the
training data was used for hyperparameters searching in the
point cloud construction algorithms, and the test data was used
for evaluating the algorithms.
When generating the IF signal matrix, there are two sources
of randomness: the noise term n introduced in Equation (13)
and the random sampling of the ground truth point cloud
from the mesh model. Therefore, all the evaluation processes
were repeated 10 times for each mesh model and the average
metrics were reported, to minimize any potential effect of the
randomness.
B. Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the quality of the point cloud constructed by
an algorithm, it is necessary to deﬁne the evaluation metrics
for comparing the output point cloud against the ground truth
point cloud. LetPCM denote the ground truth point cloud and
PCK denote the point cloud generated by the radar, which are

7
aM×3 matrix and aK×3 matrix, respectively. It is important
to note that the point cloud construction algorithm can provide
an uncertain number of points that might be different to the
ground truth ( M ̸= K), and PCK can have a non-uniform
distribution while PCM is distributed uniformly on the mesh
model. The evaluation metrics should take the two point clouds
PCM and PCK as input and measure the similarity between
them. First, two points are deﬁned to be close to each other
if their Euclidean distance is less than a certain distance D.
In this research, D is set to 10 cm as an empirical estimation
of the error tolerance of a HAR system. Then, the following
terms and metrics are deﬁned:
• Precision: Number of points in PCK that has at least one
close point from PCM , divided by K. It evaluates how
many points in PCK are considered to be accurate.
• Sensitivity/Recall: Number of points in PCM that has
at least one close point from PCK, divided by M. It
evaluates how well PCK can cover the space of PCM .
• Fowlkes–Mallows index (FMI): the geometric mean of
precision and sensitivity, i.e. √precision× sensitivity.
• Intersection over Union (IoU): Establish two regular 3D
voxel grids forPCK andPCM with the voxel size set to
10 cm× 10 cm× 10 cm, consider a voxel to be occupied
if there is at least one point present in the voxel, then the
IoU is calculated as the number of overlapping voxels
of the two voxel grid, divided by the union. The IoU
evaluates the similarity of the two point clouds at the
granularity of the voxel size.
An ideal system should have both high precision and high
sensitivity, whereas the relative importance of the two depends
on the application. In this section, the FMI, i.e. the geometric
mean of precision and sensitivity, is used to indicate the
performance of the system. The IoU also provides a good
indication of how the generated point cloud can represent
the scene. However, as the calculation of the IoU is highly
sensitive to the voxel size and outliers, it is used as a secondary
metric.
C. Data Processing Chain and Algorithms
In the ﬁrst experiment, the two DPCs combined with
different AoA algorithms were evaluated and compared, in
terms of the quality of the estimated point cloud and the
computational cost. A baseline radar and scene conﬁguration
were designed to approximate a typical setup in a common
indoor environment as follows:
• One transmitter and a 4× 4 uniform receiver array.
• The chirp frequency is 77 GHz to 81 GHz, the slope
is 40 MHz/us, the chirp duration is 100 us, the ADC
sampling rate is 15 MHz, each frame is 50 ms with 50
chirps, and each chirp has 1500 samples (as shown in
Figure 7).
• Each human mesh model is sampled into 512 points and
placed at 2 m away from the radar.
• SNR is 30 dB.
• The subject has a velocity of 0.05 m/s moving away from
the radar.
Fig. 7: Chirp conﬁguration of one frame in the baseline setup.
TABLE I: FMI (standard deviation in parentheses) comparison
between the algorithms when using a 4× 4 receiver array and
a subject velocity of 0.05 m/s.
FMI in % Angle-FFT Conv. BF MVDR BF MUSIC
1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D
DPC1 68.3
(7.5)
68.2
(7.9)
60.6
(8.7)
67.2
(7.6)
67.7
(7.6)
74.5
(6.7)
69.7
(6.9)
77.0
(6.2)
DPC2 NA 43.7
(7.8)
46.5
(7.1)
50.2
(7.6)
53.1
(7.4)
52.7
(7.4)
53.2
(7.0)
• The AoA algorithm uses 512 bins to cover the±90° AoV ,
i.e. the angular resolution is 0.35°.
The velocity of the subject is introduced following the
assumption that a real person cannot stay absolutely stationary
during the measurement. At a velocity of 0.05 m/s and a frame
time of 50 ms, the total displacement will be 2.5 mm and is
considered negligible. The velocity provides a variation on
the signal received at different chirps, as otherwise the multi-
snapshot AoA estimation algorithms would receive an identi-
cal signal at all chirps and would yield a poor performance.
Combining the two DPCs with different AoA estimation
algorithms, there are 14 methods in total to be evaluated.
For each method, both the 1D search approach and the 2D
sub-grid approach described in Section V-C are included. For
the 2D angle-FFT method, the full-grid approach is used
instead of the sub-grid approach, since the beneﬁt of the
lower computational cost is less signiﬁcant for FFTs. The
algorithms will be referred to using the format “DPC-Method-
1D/2D” throughout the paper. For example, DPC1-Conv-2D
refers to the conventional beamforming method in DPC1 that
uses a 2D steering vector search. The angle-FFT method is
not applicable in DPC2 as it is not a multi-snapshot algorithm.
Algorithms in DPC1 include a CFAR peak detection step on
the Range-Doppler heatmap, where the optimal parameters for
the CFAR were searched on the training dataset. Then, the
performance of the algorithms on the test dataset was evaluated
and compared. The results are shown in Table I and Table II
as FMI and IoU (in % and with the standard deviation in
parentheses), respectively.
TABLE II: IoU (standard deviation in parentheses) comparison
between the algorithms when using a 4× 4 receiver array and
a subject velocity of 0.05 m/s.
IoU in % Angle-FFT Conv. BF MVDR BF MUSIC
1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D
DPC1 21.2
(4.3)
22.5
(4.6)
14.6
(3.9)
20.6
(4.1)
18.0
(4.4)
23.4
(4.1)
19.0
(4.1)
22.7
(3.5)
DPC2 NA 11.2
(3.2)
12.2
(3.0)
13.2
(3.3)
14.7
(3.4)
14.6
(3.2)
14.6
(3.3)

8
Fig. 8: Examples of the radar detection using the different
algorithms, when using a 4× 4 receiver array and a subject
velocity of 0.05 m/s.
There are a few important observations from the experiment.
Even though the subject had a low velocity, the DPC1 with a
Doppler-FFT outperformed the other signiﬁcantly. One main
reason is that, as the number of receivers is much lower than
the number of signals, the AoA estimation algorithm can fail to
distinguish points with a close angle. Instead, these points will
be identiﬁed as one strong signal source. On the contrary, the
CFAR peak detection step in DPC1 picks a set of points around
the peak that are above the CFAR threshold. As these points
also contribute to the point cloud, the output becomes denser
and the sensitivity is improved. This effect can be observed
from the example detection shown in Figure 8.
In terms of the different algorithms, the MVDR and MU-
SIC methods outperformed the angle-FFT and conventional
methods, at the expense of higher complexity. Meanwhile, all
the 2D methods outperformed the 1D methods due to a more
ﬁne-grained resolution (as shown earlier in Figure 5). The
best performance was achieved with the DPC1-MVDR-2D
and DPC1-MUSIC-2D methods, with an FMI of 74.5% and
77.0%, respectively. However, the IoU metrics show that the
point clouds were still far from the objective of high-accuracy
scene reconstruction, as the highest IoU was only 23.4%. It
can be seen from Figure 8 that, while the distribution of the
point cloud mostly ﬁtted the subject, the distribution was not
even and there were body parts (like the hands) that received
fewer points. Therefore, there is still a big gap before the radar
output can be directly used by applications that require high
quality data.
Table III compares the algorithms in terms of execution
time. The algorithms were run using the same dataset and
parameters multiple times. The algorithms were written in
Python without any processor-speciﬁc optimization and were
run on one Intel i7-9700K CPU core. The result is shown
as the relative execution time of each algorithm when com-
pared with the DPC1-FFT-1D method (the most lightweight
method) and normalized with the number of detected points,
to give an indication of their relative complexity. All the
2D methods have a higher complexity than the 1D methods.
For algorithms in DPC1, the 1D angle-FFT method has the
TABLE III: Normalized execution time comparison between
the algorithms using the baseline setup.
Normalized
Complexity
Angle-FFT Conv. BF MVDR BF MUSIC
1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D
DPC1 1.00 13.42 4.38 9.32 3.51 8.99 4.02 8.85
DPC2 NA 5.69 12.38 5.31 10.89 5.67 10.61
TABLE IV: Relative FMI difference of the algorithms when
using a 4× 4 receiver array and a subject velocity of 0.5 m/s
in comparison to 0.05 m/s.
FMI in % Angle-FFT Conv. BF MVDR BF MUSIC
1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D
DPC1 +8.3 +11.4 +12.1 +10.7 +10.4 +8.8 +10.1 +7.7
DPC2 NA +4.6 +2.6 +5.3 +4.6 +8.4 +5.6
lowest computational cost. With the sub-grid optimization, the
complexity of the 2D beamforming and MUSIC methods can
be kept at around twice the 1D methods. The complexity
without the sub-grid optimization is expected to be much
higher, as can be estimated from the difference between the
2D and 1D angle-FFT methods. When considering both the
complexity and the performance, the DPC1-FFT-1D method
provides a good trade-off between them. The MVDR methods
and MUSIC methods in DPC1 give the best performance at
the cost of 9x execution time and require additional efforts
on the hardware and implementation. It is worth noting that
many mmWave radar systems, like [6], [7], [27], are built
based on the DPC1-FFT-1D method. Therefore, these systems
can potentially beneﬁt from a more complex AoA estimation
algorithm.
D. Subject Velocity
The motion of the subject being sensed has a signiﬁcant
impact on the detection output. In DPC1, a higher velocity
makes a subject easier to be identiﬁed in the Range-Doppler
heatmap. Due to the relative position difference between the
body parts of the subject, they will have a different radial
velocity with respect to the radar, making them distinguishable
in the Range-Doppler heatmap. In DPC2, a higher velocity
increases the variance of the signal between chirps and allows
a better estimate of the data covariance matrix. To verify
the theorem, an experiment was carried out using the same
conﬁguration as the baseline setup, except that the velocity of
the subject was set to different values from 0.1 m/s to 1 m/s.
The ground truth point cloud was taken as the average position
of the subject during the motion.
Table IV and Table V show two examples of the experiment
where the subject velocity was set to 0.5 m/s and 1 m/s,
respectively. When compared with Table I, all algorithms
achieved a 2.6% to 14.5% improvement in terms of the FMI
when the subject had an increased velocity. Figure 9 shows the
FMI and IoU of the DPC1-MUSIC-2D method with different
subject velocities from 0.1 m/s to 1 m/s. An overall positive
correlation can be observed between the subject velocity and
the detection performance, and the impact is the most obvious
at lower velocities (around 0.5 m/s). Some examples of the
detection at 1 m/s are shown in Figure 10.

9
TABLE V: Relative FMI difference of the algorithms when
using a 4× 4 receiver array and a subject velocity of 1 m/s
in comparison to 0.05 m/s.
FMI in % Angle-FFT Conv. BF MVDR BF MUSIC
1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D
DPC1 +9.7 +13.0 +14.5 +12.8 +12.0 +9.8 +11.6 +8.2
DPC2 NA +5.3 +2.6 +4.3 +3.4 +9.3 +5.8
Fig. 9: FMI and IoU (with errors) of the DPC1-MUSIC-2D
algorithm with different subject velocities.
E. SNR
In a practical environment, a radar system can experience
noise from different sources, such as the thermal noise of the
radar chip. The SNR also depends on the distance between
the radar and the subject, as the signal power drops quickly
along with the distance. In the simulator, the SNR can be
controlled by the power of the noise term n in Equation (13).
In this section, the performance of the algorithms between a
high SNR environment (40 dB) and a lower SNR environment
(5 dB) is compared. Two experiments were carried with the
subject velocity set to 0.05 m/s and 0.5 m/s, respectively. The
results are shown in Table VI and Table VII.
In the low SNR environment, all the algorithms in DPC1
experienced a similar drop in performance, as expected. How-
ever, the algorithms in the DPC2 showed a higher perfor-
mance. The reason is that the higher noise affected the model
order estimation step and the system tends to report a higher
number of points. Taking the DPC2-Conv-2D method as an
example, the average size of the detected point cloud was
Fig. 10: Examples of the radar detection using the different
algorithms, when using a 4× 4 receiver array and a subject
velocity of 1 m/s.
TABLE VI: Performance difference when using a 4× 4
receiver array and a subject velocity of 0.05 m/s in a low
SNR environment ( 5 dB in comparison to 30 dB).
FMI in % Angle-FFT Conv. BF MVDR BF MUSIC
1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D
DPC1 -8.1 -5.8 -5.5 -5.6 -6.4 -6.3 -5.7 -6.2
DPC2 NA +2.2 +2.8 +1.7 +2.7 +1.6 +2.4
TABLE VII: Performance difference when using a 4× 4
receiver array and a subject velocity of 0.5 m/s in a low SNR
environment (5 dB in comparison to 30 dB).
FMI in % Angle-FFT Conv. BF MVDR BF MUSIC
1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D 1D 2D
DPC1 -7.8 -6.2 -7.2 -6.1 -8.3 -7.5 -8.9 -7.4
DPC2 NA +2.5 +2.8 +1.0 +0.8 -0.7 +0.9
found to be 20.3% higher in a low SNR environment than in a
higher SNR environment. However, this was still insufﬁcient
to reach a similar performance as DPC1.
F . Antenna Layout
Theoretically, the antenna layout determines the angular
resolution that an AoA estimation algorithm can achieve. The
more receivers in one direction, the higher resolution the radar
can measure [1]. However, this is questionable when the signal
sources are spatially close and continuous. Meanwhile, having
more antennas also increases the cost of the hardware, as more
circuit components, processing units and memory would be
required. Therefore, it is beneﬁcial to study the relationship
between the antenna layout and the output quality and ﬁnd
the optimal trade-off for an application.
Common commercial mmWave radars use up to three
transmitters and up to four receivers, giving up to twelve
virtual receivers as a receiving array. Some radar models are
designed for automotive applications and prioritize the azimuth
direction, while others are designed for general purpose appli-
cations and have a similar resolution in both the azimuth and
elevation directions. In this section, common antenna layouts
implemented on the TI radars are evaluated and compared,
as well as a few square-shape antenna layouts that are more
common in research projects, as listed in Figure 11. The same
radar conﬁguration and scene setup in Section VI-C were used.
The experiment compares the antenna layouts using the DPC1-
MUSIC-2D algorithm (the best performing algorithm). The
result is shown in Table VIII.
Fig. 11: The list of receiver layouts being evaluated. (a)-(d) are
square antenna arrays. (e)-(f) are non-regular antenna arrays
implemented on TI radars.

10
TABLE VIII: Performance comparison between different an-
tenna layouts using the baseline conﬁguration and the DPC1-
MUSIC-2D algorithm (standard deviation in parentheses).
Antenna
Layouts a b c d e f g
FMI
in %
76.7
(6.4)
77.0
(6.2)
76.8
(4.8)
77.9
(4.5)
72.4
(6.3)
77.8
(5.9)
65.0
(6.0)
IoU
in %
23.4
(4.1)
22.7
(3.5)
20.5
(2.8)
18.8
(2.7)
20.8
(4.0)
23.9
(4.2)
17.0
(3.5)
Fig. 12: Examples of the radar detection using the different
antenna layouts with the baseline setup.
It can be seen that most antenna layouts had similar perfor-
mance, except the layout (g) which had a worse performance
as it is designed for automotive applications. The layout (e)
has a non-uniform antenna distribution that slightly affected its
performance. All other layouts showed a similar performance
regardless of the antenna size. Therefore, considering the
increased hardware cost and computational cost of increasing
the number of antennas, a small antenna size can be preferable
for 3D sensing applications. Figure 12 shows some examples
of the detection using different antenna layouts.
G. Chirp Conﬁguration
The chirp conﬁguration can have various effects on the
distance detection and velocity detection. These factors can
indirectly affect the quality of the ﬁnal point cloud. In this
section, three different chirp conﬁgurations were tested and
compared against the baseline conﬁguration in Section VI-C.
The details of the three conﬁgurations (named A, B and C) and
the performance are shown in Table IX. Each conﬁguration
has certain parameter cut to 80% to evaluate the effect on
the output. Conﬁguration A had an 80% reduced chirp slope
and, hence, a reduced effective bandwidth from 4 GHz to
3.2 GHz. Conﬁguration B had an 80% reduced ADC sampling
rate that reduced the samples per chirp from 1500 to 1200.
Conﬁguration C had an 80% reduced number of chirps per
frame, from 50 to 40. All other parameters were kept the same
as the baseline with the DPC1-MUSIC-2D algorithm.
The result shows that the performance can be strongly
affected by the effective bandwidth and the number of chirps.
The former affects the distance resolution of the detection,
and the latter affects the Doppler resolution. Reducing either
of these parameters reduces the accuracy of the range-Doppler
heatmap and the estimation of the covariance matrix. On the
other hand, the effect of reducing the ADC sampling rate and
the number of samples per chirp is much less signiﬁcant.
TABLE IX: FMI (standard deviation in parentheses) com-
parison between four chirp conﬁgurations using the DPC1-
MUSIC-2D algorithm.
Chirp Conﬁguration Baseline A B C
Slope of the chirp (MHz/us) 40 32 40 40
ADC sampling rate (MHz) 15 15 12 15
Chirps per frame 50 50 50 40
FMI in % 77.0
(6.2)
71.1
(6.8)
76.5
(6.0)
70.2
(6.0)
(a) Points detected without SRPC.
 (b) Points detected with SRPC.
Fig. 13: Using SRPC algorithm to improve the resolution and
distribution of the data.
VII. S UPER -RESOLUTION POINT CLOUD CONSTRUCTION
ALGORITHM
It can be seen from Figure 8 and Figure 10 that the
constructed point clouds can be noisy and the distribution of
the points can be imbalanced. One major reason is that the
point cloud construction relies on the peak detection result
over the range-Doppler-FFT spectrum, so the distribution of
the points will be limited by the resolution of the FFT, and the
points will have a discrete distribution in the range domain (as
the curve-like data from the left view). Although it is possible
to improve this resolution, such as zero padding the data before
applying the FFT, it would also increase the computational cost
and memory consumption. Meanwhile, there are false detected
points due to the outliers from the peak detection stage. To
address the mentioned issue and improve the quality of the
constructed point cloud, a novel super-resolution point cloud
construction (SRPC) algorithm is proposed.
The SRPC algorithm aims to improve the distribution of
the point cloud and make it span more naturally in the spatial
space. The rationale is shown in Figure 13. When detecting
peaks in a range-Doppler spectrum or an angle spectrum,
a common approach is taking all points above a static or
dynamic threshold, where the distribution of the points is
limited by the resolution of the original data. An example of
this effect is shown in Figure 13a, where the grid represents
the resolution of the data and all the detected points must
fall on the grid. The SRPC algorithm aims to return a set
of points that have a higher resolution than the original data
and fall more naturally on the distribution curve, as shown in
Figure 13b.
The algorithm can be broken down into the following
steps. First, the power spectrum is upsampled into the desired
resolution using linear interpolation. Then, for each of the
originally detected points i∈ [1..K], the algorithm randomly
samples ni points around it with a probability distribution

11
being the amplitude of the upsampled power spectrum. The
value of ni is calculated as:
ni = pi·αSRPC
th (14)
where pi is the power of the point, th is the threshold of the
peak detection algorithm, and αSRPC is a global hyperpa-
rameter that controls the aggressiveness of the algorithm. The
termpi ensures that a point with higher power will be sampled
into more points, as the power indicates the conﬁdence that a
point can represent a real signal source. The parameterαSRPC
ampliﬁes the importance ofpi, where a higher αSRPC pushes
the distribution of the points towards the peak of the spectrum
and gives a more dense distribution. The sampling process is
repeated for each point i to form a new point list. Finally, K
points (the population of the original detection) are randomly
selected from the new point list, so that the total number of
detected points is kept the same and the computational cost
of the rest of the system is not affected. Since the algorithm
tends to sample more points at higher power, the distribution
of the ﬁnal points will also tend to be around higher powers,
and, hence, gives a more natural distribution regarding the
power spectrum and overcomes the limitation of the original
data resolution. The time complexity of the SRPC algorithm
is approximately O(K·ni), where a typical value of ni can
fall between 2 and 8.
When constructing the point cloud, the SRPC is applied
when detecting peaks from the range-FFT spectrum and de-
tecting peaks from the angle spectrum in the AoA estimation
step. The former improves the data distribution in the range
domain and eliminates the curve-like effect when looking at
the point cloud from the left view. The latter improves the
data distribution in the angle domain so that the points tend to
span into the space rather than appearing as a dense cluster.
Meanwhile, since the points will be distributed around higher
powers, the probability of outliers will be reduced.
To evaluate the proposed SRPC algorithm, it was inserted
into the DPC1-FFT-1D and DPC1-MUSIC-2D methods men-
tioned in Section VI-C when using the baseline setup. The two
methods were chosen as they represent the most lightweight
algorithm and the most accurate algorithm, respectively. Since
the SRPC is likely to produce point clouds with different
sizes and to ensure a fair comparison, a ﬁxed number of 512
points were randomly taken from the point cloud generated
by each algorithm for the evaluation. The result is shown in
Figure 14. After applying the SRPC algorithm, the distribution
of the point cloud appeared to be more natural and better
distributed around the ground truth, and the outliers in the
original detection were reduced. A quantitative evaluation is
shown in Table X. The performance without SRPC dropped
slightly when compared with Table I because the output
size was forced to be 512, but both metrics have improved
after applying SRPC. Therefore, it is shown that the SRPC
algorithm can successfully improve the data point distribution,
reduce the outliers and produce a more natural point cloud
that can be potentially preferable for higher-level applications.
Future work of this research includes an efﬁcient hardware
implementation of this algorithm using the radar on-chip
Fig. 14: Examples of point clouds constructed with and
without the SRPC algorithm.
TABLE X: Performance comparison of two algorithms with
and without SRPC.
DPC1-FFT-1D DPC1-MUSIC-2D
FMI IoU FMI IoU
Without SRPC 64.9 20.2 72.1 22.9
With SRPC 69.5 23.6 72.9 25.9
processors so that it can be further veriﬁed in real-world
scenarios, as well as an evaluation of its effectiveness in
higher-level applications like posture estimation.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a mmWave radar simulator is presented. The
system is used to evaluate the ability of the mmWave radar as
a 3D imaging sensor. A mmWave radar dataset is constructed
using the FAUST dataset as the ground truth to provide 3D
mesh models of human subjects, from which mmWave radar
IF signals are simulated and used to evaluate different point
cloud construction algorithms. The FMI and IoU metrics are
deﬁned to evaluate the quality of the generated point cloud.
The evaluation is performed regarding a set of different factors,
including the DPCs, AoA estimation algorithms, subject veloc-
ity, SNR, antenna layout and chirp conﬁguration. It was found
that the DPC combining a range-Doppler-FFT and a single-
snapshot AoA estimation algorithm gives better performance.
Among all the AoA estimation algorithms, the angle-FFT
method gives a good trade-off between high performance and
low computational cost, whereas the more advanced AoA
estimation algorithms, like MVDR and MUSIC, give the best
performance at up to 9x higher execution time. The velocity
of the subject helps signiﬁcantly in the detection, as the
algorithms are better at detecting a moving subject than a
stationary object. When comparing common antenna layouts,
large square antenna arrays give the best performance, but the
advantage is not signiﬁcant in a 3D imaging application when
the data sources are spatially close and continuous. It is shown
that the performance of the point cloud detection beneﬁts from
higher effective bandwidth and a higher number of chirps
per frame. Finally, a novel SRPC algorithm is proposed for
improving the resolution and distribution of the point cloud
and reducing the probability of outliers. The algorithm applies

12
to the range-Doppler-FFT peak detection stage and the AoA
estimation stage and detects points at a higher resolution that
ﬁts the power spectrum better. When evaluating the algorithm
using the simulation system, it has been shown that the
algorithm can successfully improve the data distribution and
produces a more natural point cloud.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Rao, “MIMO radar,” Texas Instruments, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[2] C. Iovescu and S. Rao, “The fundamentals of millimeter wave sensors,”
Texas Instruments, 2017.
[3] T. Liu, Y . Zhao, Y . Wei, Y . Zhao, and S. Wei, “Concealed object
detection for activate millimeter wave image,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 9909–9917, 2019.
[4] P. Zhao, C. X. Lu, J. Wang, C. Chen, W. Wang, N. Trigoni, and
A. Markham, “mid: Tracking and identifying people with millimeter
wave radar,” in 2019 15th International Conference on Distributed
Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 33–40.
[5] H. Cui and N. Dahnoun, “High precision human detection and tracking
using millimeter-wave radars,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems
Magazine, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 22–32, 2021.
[6] A. Sengupta, F. Jin, R. Zhang, and S. Cao, “mm-pose: Real-time human
skeletal posture estimation using mmwave radars and cnns,” IEEE
Sensors Journal, 2020.
[7] H. Cui and N. Dahnoun, “Real-time short-range human posture estima-
tion using mmwave radars and neural networks,” IEEE Sensors Journal,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 535–543, 2022.
[8] Z. Chen, G. Gokeda, and Y . Yu, Introduction to Direction-of-arrival
Estimation. Artech House, 2010.
[9] M. Dudek, D. Kissinger, R. Weigel, and G. Fischer, “A millimeter-
wave fmcw radar system simulator for automotive applications including
nonlinear component models,” in 2011 8th European Radar Conference.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 89–92.
[10] C. Stetco, B. Ubezio, S. M ¨uhlbacher-Karrer, and H. Zangl, “Radar
sensors in collaborative robotics: Fast simulation and experimental
validation,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2020, pp. 10 452–10 458.
[11] C. Sch ¨offmann, B. Ubezio, C. B ¨ohm, S. M ¨uhlbacher-Karrer, and
H. Zangl, “Virtual radar: Real-time millimeter-wave radar sensor sim-
ulation for perception-driven robotics,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4704–4711, 2021.
[12] J. Han, L. Shao, D. Xu, and J. Shotton, “Enhanced computer vision with
microsoft kinect sensor: A review,” IEEE transactions on cybernetics ,
vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1318–1334, 2013.
[13] T. Raj, F. H. Hashim, A. B. Huddin, M. F. Ibrahim, and A. Hussain,
“A survey on lidar scanning mechanisms,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 5, p.
741, 2020.
[14] R. Appleby, D. A. Robertson, and D. Wikner, “Millimeter wave imaging:
a historical review,” in Passive and Active Millimeter-Wave Imaging XX,
vol. 10189. SPIE, 2017, p. 1018902.
[15] M. Kotaru, K. Joshi, D. Bharadia, and S. Katti, “Spotﬁ: Decimeter level
localization using wiﬁ,” in Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference
on Special Interest Group on Data Communication , 2015, pp. 269–282.
[16] K. Witrisal, S. Hinteregger, J. Kulmer, E. Leitinger, and P. Meissner,
“High-accuracy positioning for indoor applications: Rﬁd, uwb, 5g, and
beyond,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on RFID (RFID) .
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–7.
[17] M. Z. Ikram, A. Ahmad, and D. Wang, “High-accuracy distance mea-
surement using millimeter-wave radar,” in 2018 IEEE Radar Conference
(RadarConf18). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1296–1300.
[18] Y . Sun, Z. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Cao, and D. Xu, “3drimr: 3d recon-
struction and imaging via mmwave radar based on deep learning,” in
2021 IEEE International Performance, Computing, and Communications
Conference (IPCCC). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8.
[19] Y . Cheng, J. Su, M. Jiang, and Y . Liu, “A novel radar point cloud gen-
eration method for robot environment perception,” IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, 2022.
[20] E. Gentilho, P. R. Scalassara, and T. Abr ˜ao, “Direction-of-arrival estima-
tion methods: A performance-complexity tradeoff perspective,” Journal
of Signal Processing Systems , vol. 92, no. 2, pp. 239–256, 2020.
[21] J. Capon, “High-resolution frequency-wavenumber spectrum analysis,”
Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1408–1418, 1969.
[22] R. Schmidt, “Multiple emitter location and signal parameter estimation,”
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation , vol. 34, no. 3, pp.
276–280, 1986.
[23] D. K. Barton, “Modern radar system analysis,” Norwood, 1988.
[24] A. D. Singh, S. S. Sandha, L. Garcia, and M. Srivastava, “Radhar:
Human activity recognition from point clouds generated through a
millimeter-wave radar,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on
Millimeter-wave Networks and Sensing Systems . ACM, 2019, pp. 51–
56.
[25] J. Rissanen, “Modeling by shortest data description,” Automatica,
vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 465–471, 1978.
[26] F. Bogo, J. Romero, M. Loper, and M. J. Black, “FAUST: Dataset and
evaluation for 3D mesh registration,” in Proceedings IEEE Conf. on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . Piscataway, NJ,
USA: IEEE, Jun. 2014.
[27] A. D. Singh, S. S. Sandha, L. Garcia, and M. Srivastava, “Radhar:
Human activity recognition from point clouds generated through a
millimeter-wave radar,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on
Millimeter-wave Networks and Sensing Systems , 2019, pp. 51–56.

13
APPENDIX A
IF S IGNAL
In a typical FMCW radar model, the transmitter sends a
chirp signal Stx (a signal with frequency increasing linearly
with time) to detect any object in front of the radar. When
Stx is reﬂected by the object, the signal is received as Srx.
Assuming the signal has an initial frequency f0 and a slope
of S, then the frequency of Stx is a function of t:
ftx(t) =f0 +S·t (15)
The instantaneous phase of the signal is a function of t and is
the integral of ftx:
φtx(t) =
∫ t
τ=0
2π·ftx(τ) dτ
=
∫ t
τ=0
2π· (f0 +S·τ) dτ
= 2π·f0·t +
∫ t
τ=0
2π·S·τ dτ
= 2π·f0·t + 2π· 1
2S·t2
= 2π·f0·t +π·S·t2
(16)
The transmitted signal Stx can be written as a sinusoid signal:
Stx(t) =A·cos(2πf0t +πSt2) (17)
where A is the transmission power. The received signal is a
delayed and downscaled version of Stx:
Srx(t) =αA·cos
(
2πf0(t−τ) +πS(t−τ)2)
(18)
where τ is the ToF of the signal and indicates the distance
of the object, and α is the downscale factor that models the
transmission loss. The two signals, Stx andSrx, are combined
through a mixer (a multiplier) to generate one signal with both
the sum frequency and the difference frequency:
Stx(t)·Srx(t)
= αA2
2
(
cos
(
(2πf0t +πSt2) + (2πf0(t−τ) +πS(t−τ)2)
)
+
cos
(
(2πf0t +πSt2)− (2πf0(t−τ) +πS(t−τ)2)
))
= αA2
2
(
cos
(
2π(2f0−Sτ )t + 2πSt2 +πSτ 2− 2πf0τ
)
+
cos
(
2π(Sτ )t + 2πf0τ−πSτ 2))
(19)
There are two cos terms in the result. The ﬁrst one has a
frequency of 2f0 and will be removed by a low pass ﬁlter.
The second one is called the IF signal or the beat frequency.
The IF signal has the equation:
IF (t) =B·cos
(
2π(Sτ )t + 2πf0τ−πSτ 2)
(20)
whereB = αA2
2 . The signal has a frequency Sτ , i.e. the slope
of the chirp multiplied by the ToF. Therefore, the frequency
of the IF signal is directly proportional to the ToF. Given that
the slope of the chirp S is known, the distance of the object
can be calculated from the frequency of the IF signal. The
phase of the IF signal, (2πf0τ−πSτ 2), can be simpliﬁed to
(2πf0τ), as the second term is negligible: S has an order of
1012,τ has an order of 10−8, so (πSτ 2) will have a negligible
order of 10−4. In summary, the IF signal can be written as:
IF (t) =B·cos(ωbt +φb) (21)
where the angular frequency ωb and the phase of the signal
φb are:
ωb = 2π·Sτ, φ b = 2πf0τ (22)
The above equations assume that the object is stationary. If
the object is moving, the ToF τ will be varying with respect
to t. However, considering that this variation is limited to a
single chirp time, it is unlikely to produce a big change in the
frequency. The change in phase can be more signiﬁcant, but
will only affect certain applications where the phase informa-
tion is critical, such as vital sign monitoring. In such cases,
the phase can be written as a function of t as φb(t) = 4πd(t)
λ0
,
whered(t) describes the displacement of the object during the
chirp time and λ0 is the signal wavelength.
Note that the TI mmWave radar uses a complex band
architecture. It uses a complex mixer (an IQ mixer) to multiply
the two signalsStx andSrx, which has several advantages like
a lower noise ﬁgure. When in complex form, the IF signal in
Equation (21) can be written as:
IF (t) =B·ej(ωbt+φb) (23)
which has the same frequency and phase as in Equation (22).
APPENDIX B
STEERING VECTOR AND AOA ESTIMATION
Figure 15 shows the AoA of an object (point A) to the
radar (point O). The azimuth angle θa is deﬁned to be the
angle between the object’s projection on the horizontal plane
and the front direction of the radar. The line of incidence of
the object OA is projected onto the horizontal plane as OB,
and the angle between OB and the y-axis is the azimuth angle
θa. The elevation angle θe is deﬁned to be the angle between
the object and the horizontal plane (between line OA and the
x-y plane).
Fig. 15: The azimuth and elevation angle of an object.
The steering vector is a function of the receiver layout
and the incident angle. To introduce the concept of steering
vectors, it is easier to start with the one-dimensional situation.
Assuming there are two receivers separated by l, a signal will
travel an additional distance ∆d to reach the second receiver,

14
where the following approximation can be made (as shown in
Figure 1):
∆d =l·sin(θ) (24)
Given that the phase of a sinusoid signal travelled over any
distance ∆d will have a phase 2π∆d
λ , the phase difference
between the two neighbouring receivers will be:
∆φ = 2π· ∆d
λ =π·sin(θ) (25)
When using a receiver array with N azimuth receivers,
each subsequent receiver beyond the ﬁrst one will receive an
additional phase change of ∆φ, which can be written as a
steering vector:
s(θ,N ) = [1,ejπ·sin(θ),e 2jπ·sin(θ),...,e (N −1)jπ·sin(θ)] (26)
(a) Elevation angle.
 (b) Azimuth angle.
Fig. 16: The AoA can be estimated from the phase difference
between adjacent receivers.
When considering the AoA in both azimuth and elevation
directions, the situation is shown in Figure 16. Distances ∆da
and ∆de represent the extra distance travelled by the signal to
reach receiver RX0 when compared with the azimuth receiver
RX1 and the elevation receiver RX2 respectively. Similar to
Equation (25), the estimation of the elevation angle θe is given
by:
sin(θe) = ∆de
l
= ∆φe
π
(27)
where ∆φe is the phase difference between RX0 and RX2.
The azimuth angle requires a projection from the object’s
3D location to the horizontal plane. As shown in Figure 16b,
the projection from ∆da to ∆da’ gives:
∆da = ∆da’·cos(θe) (28)
Then, the angle θa can be calculated as:
sin(θa) = ∆da’
l
= ∆da
l·cos(θe)
= ∆φa
π·cos(θe)
(29)
where ∆φa is the phase difference between RX0 and RX1.
Extending Equation (27) and Equation (29) with multiple
receivers as a 2D array gives Equation (5).
Once the values of θa and θe are found, then according to
Figure 1, it can be shown that:
x =OB·sin(θa) =OA·cos(θe)sin(θa) =OA· ∆φa
π
z =OA·sin(θe) =OA· ∆φe
π
y =
√
OA2−x2−z2
(30)
whereOA is the distance of the object and can be found from
the range-FFT.